SUMMARY...An isolated wind damage/tornado threat will continue for a
few more hours from northwest Louisiana southwestward onto the
middle and upper Texas Coastal Plain.

DISCUSSION...Latest radar data shows a continuous line of strong
thunderstorms located from northeast Texas southwestward into the
southern Texas Hill Country. Moderate instability is located ahead
of much of the squall-line which will help to keep a severe threat
going for a few more hours. An isolated wind damage threat will
exist with the more intense bowing segments within the line. In
addition, the RAP is showing a 55 to 65 kt low-level jet ahead of
the line which is creating strong low-level shear profiles. WSR-88D
VWPs at Shreveport, LA and Houston, TX have strong speed shear in
the lowest 1 KM AGL with looped hodographs above that. This
low-level shear environment will be favorable for an isolated
tornado threat with rotating cells that develop within the line.

SUMMARY...Isolated downdraft-wind damage, and perhaps gusts locally
near severe limits, still may occur over the Arklatex region before
the line of thunderstorms moves over progressively more-stable air
and weakens.

DISCUSSION...Surface mesoanalysis shows a Pacific occluded/cold
front extending from a low over northwestern OK across the DFW
Metroplex to near SAT and Eagle Pass TX.  Ahead of that front, a
quasi-linear convective system (QLCS) was moving eastward across the
watch area near an MWT-TXK-ASL line southwestward to between
CLL-UTS, and over the middle Texas Coastal Plain.  A warm front --
denoting the northern rim of the Gulf/maritime-tropical air mass
with relatively uninhibited, surface-based inflow parcels --
intersected the QLCS near UTS, around Walker County TX, extending
southward over the HOU metro and GLS area, then eastward across
southeast TX/LA shelf waters.

Modifications to both the 00Z SHV RAOB and RAP soundings indicate
elevated buoyancy extending 150-250 nm northeast of the warm front,
but over strengthening boundary-layer static stability.
Accordingly, objective analyses and modified soundings reasonably
show MLCINH around 100 J/kg in the LFK/OCH areas, increasing to over
300 J/kg along I-20 and northward in the watch.  Elevated MUCAPE
around 1000-1500 J/kg is evident within about 75 nm east of the line
over AR, and near the TX/LA border farther south.  While slow
increase in theta-e/buoyancy and decrease in CINH is expected in the
boundary layer, as the warm front moves inland, the QLCS will
outpace that process over AR and northwestern LA, resulting in a
diminishing severe-wind threat eastward and with time in the
Arklatex.  In the meantime, water-loaded downdrafts still may punch
strong/damaging gusts to the surface in a few locales.

SUMMARY...Coverage and intensity of snow is expected to increase
over the discussion area through sunrise, with rates commonly 1-2
inches per hour and locally higher.  Sporadic blizzard conditions
also are possible.

DISCUSSION...Surface mesoanalysis shows a well-defined frontal-wave
cyclone with a low near the OK/KS border, south of DDC.  This low is
forecast to migrate/re-develop northeastward along a cold front and
across central/northern Kansas, reaching southeastern NE by 14Z.
That will occur in response to the northeastward ejection of a
strong mid/upper-level shortwave trough and embedded vorticity
max/cyclone now evident in moisture-channel imagery over the
northwestern TX Panhandle.  The associated deep-layer forcings --
both in terms of elevated frontogenetic ascent and DCVA/cooling
aloft -- will shift northeastward over the cold sector in step with
the motion of the deep-layer cyclone.  This will help to maintain or
increase precip over the next few hours across the OK Panhandle and
through at least dawn over western KS, and intensify existing precip
areas after about 09Z in southern NE.

Favorably strong UVV is evident in planar progs throughout the
dendritic-growth zones, likewise shifting northeastward across the
discussion area.  Time series of forecast soundings accordingly show
deep-columnar cooling of any remaining superfreezing layers to below
freezing, with dynamically driven/large-scale cooling throughout the
lower/middle troposphere and post-frontal cold advection in the
boundary layer.  In addition, tight pressure/height gradients and
vertical turbulent mixing will boost already near-blizzard
gradient-wind conditions locally.

SUMMARY...A band of strong/locally severe thunderstorms will
continue to offer a threat for sporadic damaging gusts across parts
of southeast Texas, and a tornado or two cannot be ruled out given
the favorable environment.  A new watch may be needed before the 10Z
expiration time of this one, to cover the potential eastward shift
in severe potential across the Sabine River area.

DISCUSSION...Surface mesoanalysis showed a warm front erratically
winding across southeast Texas from south of LFK to between HOU-BPT,
across the GLS area then eastward over LA shelf waters.  The
relatively cold shelf waters are influencing surface temps between
BPT-GLS and south of LCH.  However, a combination of warm advection
over that shallow layer and vertical mixing should effectively
re-form the warm front over the lower Sabine River region during the
next few hours.  This process will expand the modified marine
sector, with at least marginally surface-based effective-inflow
parcels, eastward ahead of the QLCS described next.

A well-developed QLCS was evident at 09Z from just west of ELD in
southern AR southwestward across the SHV area to near UTS and the
middle Texas Coastal Plain.  A newer line of convection has formed
from its intersection with the original QLCS over eastern
Fayette/Colorado Counties south-southwestward across Victoria
County, with the QLCS weakening to its west.  The combined
convective band is expected to continue moving eastward across and
out of the remaining watch area, into a regime characterized by
MLCAPE 1000-2000 J/kg.  MLCINH increase with eastward extent into LA
but also should decrease with time, as the warm frontal zone
repositions.  50-kt effective-shear vectors and large SRH, as
sampled by VWP hodographs, will support severe potential in the
QLCS, as well as with any relatively discrete/sustained cells that
can be maintained to its southeast, closer to the coast.

SUMMARY...The threat for occasional wind damage, and a tornado or
two with embedded mesocirculations, will continue from a line of
thunderstorms moving slowly eastward across the watch area.
Additional watch issuance may be needed within the next few hours to
its east, across more of Louisiana and perhaps southwestern
Mississippi, as the air mass slowly destabilizes there.

DISCUSSION...As of 13Z, the northern part of the primary QLCS was
located in an area of elevated buoyancy and atop roughly 300 J/kg
MLCINH over north-central LA, between RSN-MLU.  The complex extended
southwestward into progressively weakening CINH and strengthening
buoyancy, crossing the diffuse surface warm front in Vernon Parish,
then extending across extreme southeast TX, becoming ragged/
disorganized over Brazoria County.  Most of the TX part of the line
appeared anafrontal, with outflow undercutting convective elements
forming along the leading edge or crossing it from the warm sector.

Until and unless deep, relatively discrete warm-sector development
occurs and interacts with the warm-frontal zone, the QLCS will
remain the dominant storm mode and severe concern.  The foregoing
warm sector will destabilize slowly, as modest low/middle level
lapse rates are modulated favorably by a combination of low-level
warm advection and diffused diabatic surface heating.  This process
should allow roughly 1000 J/kg MLCAPE to develop eastward across
portions of southern/central LA through midday.  Meanwhile low-level
and deep shear will remain favorable over the warm sector, with
effective-shear magnitudes 50-55 kt.  Large low-level hodographs
near the warm front, and beneath the roughly 60-70-kt southerly LLJ,
will enable 300-500 J/kg effective SRH (locally higher).  Given the
strong low-level shear, and despite generally unsupportive nature of
both storm mode and leading-edge outflow behavior, isolated,
transient, embedded mesocirculations may persist and strengthen long
enough to offer a brief tornado threat.  Damaging gusts also remain
possible.

SUMMARY...Severe threat will progress across portions of the lower
MS Valley this morning. Primary severe threat is locally damaging
winds, although a tornado or two can not be ruled out.

DISCUSSION...50-100mi wide band of strong/severe convection that
evolved over TX has shifted into LA early this morning. This
activity is sagging southeast at roughly 20kt with individual cells
lifting more quickly northeast along the leading edge of this
activity. Greatest buoyancy, more supportive of surface-based
supercells, is currently located over southern LA, but adequate
instability does extend into portions of southwest MS for
potentially robust updrafts. Latest thinking is ongoing squall line,
with embedded robust updrafts, will shift across the lower MS with
an attendant wind threat. Greatest risk for tornadoes remains across
LA where mid 60s surface dew points currently reside.

SUMMARY...Strong convection should sag southeast across ww448 over
the next few hours.

DISCUSSION...Large-scale forcing for ascent is lifting well north of
ww448 across the TN/OH Valley region. Trailing band of convection
that stretches across eastern MS into southeast LA is increasingly
detached from the short-wave trough that is ejecting across the
Midwest. As LLJ refocuses north of the watch it appears lower MS
Valley band of convection should gradually propagate southeast
toward somewhat higher instability air mass located near the central
Gulf coast. Even so, 18z sounding from LIX does not exhibit
appreciable boundary-layer buoyancy; however, mid-level lapse rates
are steep and substantial elevated cape does exist when lifting a
parcel from 1km above the surface. Locally damaging winds appear to
be the greatest risk with thunderstorms as they progress across the
remainder of ww448.

SUMMARY...Brief periods of heavy snow, with accumulations of up to 1
inch/hr are possible over the next few hours. In addition, brief,
isolated instances of blizzard conditions may also occur.

DISCUSSION...A 996 mb surface low, currently located across
north-central IA, is expected to continue moving off to the
northeast for the next several hours, with little change in
intensity forecast. A steady stream of 925-850 mb moisture continues
to advect into the Mississippi valley region, where relatively
strong 850 mb frontogenesis continues to support continued lift of
these moist air parcels within a sub-freezing troposphere
(especially from central MN, westward). While the dendritic growth
zone across the discussion area is not particularly deep (i.e.
700-900 m), near-saturation to saturated conditions in the 925-500
mb layer with sub-freezing temps, combined with modest lift suggests
that at least some brief heavy snow potential exists, including for
snowfall rates of up to 1+ inches/hr.

Blizzard conditions have also been reported along the western
periphery of the low throughout the day, and with little change in
surface low intensity and associated gradient wind expected,
additional instances of blizzard conditions remain possible for at
least the next few hours, especially in portions of eastern South
Dakota.

SUMMARY...Areas of heavy snow are expected across the area through
the early morning hours. 1+ inch/hr rates are expected, with up to 2
inch/hr rates possible in the higher elevations.

DISCUSSION...An upper-level trough continues to deepen across the
southwestern CONUS, with a 100+ knot 300 mb jet streak approaching
the area from the west. Simultaneously, sfc-850 mb easterly cold air
advection has been cooling low-level profiles, with temperatures
quickly dropping below freezing at the surface. In addition, the
westward moving boundary of the colder low-level airmass is
fostering strong low-level convergence. Upper-level divergence
associated with the left-exit region of the aforementioned jet
streak overlapping areas of strong 925-850 mb frontogenesis is
currently promoting very strong, deep-layer ascent.

A relatively deep (800+ m), nearly saturated dendritic growth zone
is present across these areas experiencing strong ascent, suggesting
heavy snow potential will be a concern within the next few hours,
through early morning. Latest ensemble model guidance also suggests
heavy snow potential across central and eastern portions of New
Mexico through sunrise, with 1+ inch/hr rates likely in the lower
elevations and 2+ inch/hr rates in the higher terrain.

SUMMARY...A wintry mix of precipitation, mainly in the form of
freezing rain (accumulation rates around .05-.10 in/3 hrs) and
sleet, is expected across the area through sunrise, before a
transition to all rain occurs.

DISCUSSION...An upper-level trough and associated surface cyclone
will impinge on the area throughout the evening, with broad 30+ knot
southwesterly flow in the 925-850 mb layer promoting very strong WAA
into the early morning hours. Current RAP analysis soundings suggest
subfreezing profiles are present across much of the upper Hudson
Valley/New England area, with temperatures below freezing at the
surface as indicated by observations.

Recent KENX and KCXX dual-polarimetric radar data has shown
relatively higher ZDR/lower CC signatures associated with
precipitation currently falling across the area, suggesting a wintry
mix of freezing rain and perhaps sleet is ongoing. As strong WAA
continues across the region, temperatures aloft and at the surface
are expected to encroach the freezing mark, transitioning wintry
mixed precipitation to all rain, from portions of upstate New York
during the early morning hours, to northern portions of New England
after sunrise.

SUMMARY...The potential for mesocyclones may maximize with
quasi-discrete storms as they merge with the squall line.  A modest
conditional risk for a brief/weak tornado and/or wind damage would
likely focus with rotating convective structures.

DISCUSSION...Recent surface analysis places a warm front over
southwest AL extending east but arcing to the southeast towards
Dothan.  South of the boundary, surface-based buoyancy (750-1000
J/kg SBCAPE) will support updraft vigor in combination with
low-level shear aiding in storm organization.  It seems a condition
of a stronger/deeper and more persistent updraft (characterized by
echo tops exceeding 30,000 ft) is needed to potentially acquire
low-level rotation.  Yet, based on radar analysis during the past
several hours, storm intensification may also need a favorable
cold-pool-merging interaction between a quasi-discrete storm and the
squall line.  Given the conditional environment is favorable for
storm rotation but only one storm has realized this potential, will
continue to monitor activity over the central Gulf Coast.

SUMMARY...Isolated strong/gusty winds capable of producing mainly
tree damage will be possible this afternoon. Watch issuance is not
expected.

DISCUSSION...A thin, broken line of convection over upstate SC at
1815Z will move eastward into central SC and far south-central NC
this afternoon. The airmass ahead of this line has become weakly
unstable owing to modest diurnal heating and some steepening of
near-surface lapse rates, with MLCAPE generally in the 500-1000 J/kg
range. The movement of small clusters embedded within this line
somewhat orthogonal to mid-level 50-60 kt southwesterly flow could
encourage isolated strong/gusty downdraft winds to reach the surface
through the afternoon. Radar data from KCAE indicates this
potential, with 40-50 kt inbound velocities recently noted west of
Columbia, SC. The VWP from KCAE shows low-level winds generally
veered to southwesterly, but there is around 30-35 kt of speed shear
in the 0-1 km layer that could possibly support weak low-level
rotation within the convective line. Accordingly, a brief tornado
cannot be completely ruled out. Still, the overall marginal
thermodynamic environment (with poor mid-level lapse rates) will
probably limit a greater severe threat, and watch issuance is not
expected at this time.